with Jordan Diet. Many of you will be familiar with Jordan's work and when I told him I was going to give him a little introduction before the webinar, he asked me to keep it very little. So, I'll just say that Jordan is a distinguished professor at McMaster University whose work has focused on evidence-based medicine. Um, he's played a key role in the creation of the great approach to systematic review and has published over a thousand papers, most recently a series on the essentials of chord raid in the BMJ. Today he is here to talk to us a bit about the chord rate approach and especially how it deals with choosing target of certainty ratings and addresses issues of precision and risk of bias. This is the first webinar in a series of two that he'll be conducting with us on cord raid and I'll talk a little bit more about how you can get registered for part two after the talk. Um but before I pass over to Jordan, I'm just going to do a few little housekeeping notes. Um first of all, we're running the session a little bit like a workshop. So, while you won't be able to turn on your microphone or camera, we would love it if you would drop any questions that you might have into that Q&A box down at the bottom of the screen as we go along, and we'll answer these after the presentation. We'll leave lots of time for questions. Um, secondly, during the talk, we're going to ask you to take part in a good number of polls. We're just looking for quick snap judgments here, so we'll keep these very fast-paced, but we do hope that you'll keep an eye out for them as we go. Um, and finally, we will record this session and make it available afterwards on our website. So, please don't worry if you need to go back to something. You'll be able to re revisit whatever you'd like to revisit at your own pace once the recording is online. Okay, I think that's all I have for you. So, um, Jordan, I'm going to pass over to you and let you take it from here. Thanks again for being here, everyone. Thanks very much, Joanna. Uh, real pleasure to be here with you. Um, so as Johanna mentioned, uh, we're going to be having some polls where, uh, you get a chance to get involved and, uh, express, uh, how you think things are going. Um, and it helps me to understand where people are. So, uh, that's so we'll hope that you'll very much engage in that with, as Johanna said, quick off-the- cuff answers. Uh second thing is Johanna mentioned that you can uh ask questions. I'm happy if you ask questions as we go along. So if anything that I'm saying is not clear or uh you have something that you're uncertain about or you even you want to make a comment uh please feel free. Uh I find that these things are more enjoyable the more interaction there is. So please do feel free. So uh I'm going to start with the context of core grade a little bit about grade background and the current problem and then core grade as the solution to that problem starting with an overview and then three aspects of core grade certainty of evidence raising choosing the target of certainty rating addressing precision and risk of bias. The other elements of core grade uh including moving from evidence to recommendations or decisions is going to come in the second part of the seminar which will be several months down the line. So clinical epidemiology represents the science underlying evidence-based medicine. Clinical epidemiology provides guidance and tools for using clinical evidence to optimize patient care. In the development of these tools, there is always a tension between keeping it as simple as possible and maintaining methodologic rigor. The phrase people use for that is often as simple as possible but no simpler. I'm going to suggest to you now that recently clinical epidemiology in developing guidance and tools has lost the balance between simplicity and methodologic rigor and has undervalued simplicity and overvalued methodologic rigor. One example of this to me is Cochran risk of bias 2 which was replaced with risk of bias one. Risk of bias one was very simple. It had limitations which could be addressed but in trying to address them risk of bias 2 lost the balance. It has a number of signaling questions with algorithm maps responses for risk of bias judgment. Some signaling questions are complex. Outcome assessment influenced by knowledge of the intervention received. That's a decision that is difficult and requires pretty detailed knowledge of the content of the area you're dealing with. Challenging terminology. I keep when I look at uh risk of bias 2 in its presentation, I'm looking for blinding. But I don't see blinding. I see bias due to deviations from the intended intervention. Um, and particularly deviations from the intended intervention because of trial context. I consider these challenging judgments. Well, what's the result of the complexity of risk of bias too? Low uptake outside of Cochran errors when people use it. Poor reliability. We've come up with a solution uh to this particular problem of risk of bias assessment by developing an instrument that we call robust RCT. I'll tell you more about that in the course of this webinar. So that's for randomized trials. What about for non-randomized studies uh of interventions, observational studies? Well, Cochran suggests Robin's eye. Robin's eye makes risk of bias 2 look simple. You have to list the relevant confounding domains and co-interventions. Uh seven domains three to eight signaling questions very complicated and the studies that have looked at the performance of Robin's eye have found people make lots of mistakes. They try to modify it. there's misunderstandings and it takes a very long time to complete. So real problems perhaps even more serious problems than with Cochran risk of bias too. Moving now to another area we've talked about risk of bias instruments. What about the wider uh area of clinical practice guidelines? Well, guidelines have become key tools in evidence-based medicine and in clinical practice in general. Guidelines to be optimally useful, they have to tell their clinician and sometimes patient audiences about what the certainty of the evidence is. Quality of evidence is a synonym and the strength of the recommendations. Grade offers an approach to doing this. It gives you guidance on deciding on the certainty of the evidence and it gives guidance on moving from evidence to recommendations and grade has been quite successful. Uh over 120 organizations worldwide have adopted. They include prestigious ones like in the upper left hand corner the World Health Organization leading American organizations, American thoracic society, American college of physicians. Uh in the evidence synthesis world, Cochran now insists that Cochran reviews use grade and present their certainty of evidence. Um the uh in the NICE in the NHS uh uses grade. So very lot of people using it, a lot of prestigious organizations using grade. So uh grade's done very well that way. But now there's a problem. And that problem is that in keeping with what I've suggested is a general trend within clinical epidemiology, the science behind evidence-based medicine of loss of the balance between methodologic sophistication and simplicity. Well, the uh grade working group uh has been for many years uh leading the development of grade guidance and they have publications initially in the journal of clinical epidemiology more recently in the annals of internal medicine 40 papers and still going. Some of the earlier guidance in those 40 papers has become obsolete and new guidance is available. This challenges people to find to be alert to and find the new guidance and see exactly where it applies and what no longer applies. Well, in addition to these 40 papers from official papers from the grade working group, grade authorities have published other papers and indeed what I'm talking about today core grade was not a official does not have the official stamp of the great working group but developed uh by uh people with great expertise outside of the opaces of the great working group. So this is a lot of papers. Um there's a challenge in identifying them and keeping up to date and integrating and in addition and uh at least equally serious is much of the guidance is complex making grade less accessible to lots of people. And indeed we've pleased that 120 organizations all these prestigious organizations have endorsed grade but the new uptake is quite limited. Uh and the sense is that people are becoming potentially disillusioned with grade when it becomes excessively complex. So what's the solution to this problem? Well, we've offered a solution which is something we call core grade. Core grade represents the essentials of grade and all you need to apply. So I used the term I may use it again on one-stop shopping um the one-stop shopping for not all of grade deals with network meta analysis deals with prognosis. It deals with diagnosis. Core grade and developed thus far is focuses on paired comparisons intervention and control or comparator of interventions. It deals with both certainty of evidence which comes out of systematic reviews and moving from evidence to recommendations uh which is what guidelines do and what health technology assessments do as well. Seven papers in the BMJ were published on a weekly basis between April and June of this year. And once again, it's intended that if you go to those seven papers, it is all you need. You're not going to have to look elsewhere. Everything you need for rating your certainty of evidence and moving from evidence to recommendations. The essentials of the process are in these seven papers in the BMJ. So here is the overview of the core grade process. uh on the left side part of this slide is the systematic review pro part of the process and on the right side the guidelines moving from evidence to decisions or recommendations excuse me. So uh you start with your pico your careful clear uh precise definition of your patients interventions compared outcome. uh you then undertake the search for evidence to inform your PICO and you will have a number of studies that are going to address a number of outcomes. And when you think about those outcomes uh particularly if you are uh if the review is informing a guideline you will get the critical and important outcomes and you may differentiate between outcomes you should consider critical and important and then there are other outcomes that may people may have measured that are not so important and you're not going to pay much attention to them or any attention to them. Subsequently, you're going to focus on the critical and important. You collate the evidence and then you have the evidence for each of your outcomes. And of course, evidence can differ between outcomes. Maybe people have done lots of randomized trials looking at mortality, but for long-term harms, uh, you're going to have much lower quality of evidence. So for each outcome is you're going to have its own associated evidence and in the grade calc of doing it you're going to classify your evidence in terms of certainty or quality as high, moderate, low un or very low. Well, you finish your systematic review and you prevent present the best estimates of the effect of the intervention versus the comparator on the outcomes of interest and the associated certainty to your health technology assessment group or your clinical practice guideline. And the job of the clinical practice guideline is to recommend in favor or against the intervention and specify the strength of their recommendation. According to grade, there are three categories that they will always consider and those are the benefits and harms, the overall certainty of the evidence and patients values and preferences. um and particularly when they are taking the perspective of the individual patient that may be all they need. On the other hand, even with the individual patient perspective, they may need more. But certainly if it is a public health or systems perspective that they are taking then they are also want to consider other factors in moving from evidence to recommendation on the right side in with the green background resources cost feasibility acceptability and equity issues comparing the intervention to the comparator. And after thinking about all of that, they will formulate their recommendations. The recommendations may be for the intervention and those recommendations can be strong or weak. Uh the recommendations may be against the intervention as well and they may also be strong or weak. So you end up grade has language that goes with a strong recommendation recommend and language that goes with a weak or conditional. Lots of organizations don't like to call their recommendations weak. Grade suggest conditional which is the uh alternative wording people a lot of people seem to have found preferable. Anyway, you end up with recommend using suggest using suggest against or recommend against. So that's the overview of the core grade process of collecting the evidence, summarizing it and moving from evidence to decisions or recommendations. Here this slide summarizes the grade approach to certainty of evidence. On the right side of the slide you see the four categories high, moderate, low and very low certainty or quality of evidence. Randomized trials start as high certainty evidence but they may not end up as high certainty evidence. The pro they may have problems with risk of bias. Randomized trials may be unconcealed, unblinded or lost lose people to follow up. The results may be imprecise with wide confidence intervals. Uh there may be problems with indirectness inconsistency. results differ between studies and everything else looks good but we have studies that are hidden from us and publication bias can then cause problems. So although randomized trials start as high certainty evidence um they are uh they may be rated down for any of the five reasons. In the webinar today, we are going to talk about choosing the target of the certainty rating and issues of imprecision that go along with choosing the target and risk of bias. In the next webinar down the road, we'll be talking about the other possibilities of rating down indirectness, inconsistency, and publication bias, as well as moving from evidence to recommendations. So that's the story with randomized trials start as high but with these problems they may go to moderate low or sometimes even very low certainty of evidence despite there being rand one or more randomized trials. Non-randomized studies of interventions, otherwise known as observational studies, do not start as high. Rather, they start as low certainty and they may be rated down to very low certainty for any of the uh features of the problems or uh limitations that I've described. However, if the treatment effect is large enough, things like epinephrine and anaphylactic shock, insulin and diabetic ketoacidosis, replacing somebody's hips when they have hippopositis effects may be large enough that it moves up to moderate or very large enough that we actually have high certainty as we do for those examples. uh dose response relationship can also support moving up from low to moderate or even high certainty evidence. So that's the overall picture of the great approach to certainty of evidence and we'll get into some of the details. Now before getting into the details um I'd like to point out something that people uh sometimes are not vividly aware of which is that certainty of evidence is a continuum and if we just talk about an individual domain are we going to rate down for risk of bias for instance well there we may think no serious problems we're not going to rate down serious ious problems we're going to rate down once or even various serious problems and rate down twice. However, there may it is a continuum and there may be close calls where it's very close to there's some threshold as soon as you make categories out of a continuum you have thresholds and you may be very near one of those thresholds. You may be near the threshold between not serious and serious or between serious and very serious which would warrant rating down too. And we suggest that users of core grade be conscious of this uh because they may be near a threshold and that may affect final decisions and that's similar when you get into I've just talked about the individual domains of rating down. Um we also have the similar issue when you come across and make a final decision about the certainty of rating for a particular outcome. Um we have our four categories very low, low, moderate or high but it's on an underlying continuum and we we make particular thresholds to uh divide up that continuum for issues of simplicity and understanding. But once again, you may end up with a rating very near the threshold and that you may well want to convey that to your audience. So we've started with the process that I described in the overview of getting with your structured clinical question, your patients interventions, comparators and outcomes. But core grade suggests that when systematic reviewers or guideline panels come up with their PICO, they also at the same time think of possible issues in subgroups and they should think of subgroups in terms of the impact of both differences in baseline risk and relative effects. So in the example here it was nurmatravir ratonavir uh probably the best treatment for uh individuals with covid non- severe covid population non- severe covid intervention the drug uh comparison standard of care and outcomes that include hospital admission mortality and so on. So there are two ways that populations may differ. They may differ because of different baseline risk and though relative effects are similar across um across different groups the ultimate impact in terms of what's important to patients which is absolute effects will differ. So in low baseline risk the absolute effect will be small. In high baseline risk the absolute effect will be will be large. And core grade challenges the review or guideline panel to consider what might affect baseline risk. What will have larger baseline risk and the larger beneficial effects. In this case, the panel said in immunosuppressed patients, they're going to have a higher risk of hospitalization in particular mortality as well. And recommendations may want to take that into account and indeed they did when I worked with the WH World Health Organization in coming up with a recommendation for this particular issue. uh the the uh systematic review group and the panel also thought that larger baseline risk may happen in those with negative corology results and in those who are unvaccinated. That's differences in baseline risk where relative risks are the same bigger effects in those with higher baseline risks. On the other hand, we may much less frequently differences in baseline risk across populations are ubiquitous. Differences in relative risk across subgroups are much less common. But we suggest a systematic review uh team or guideline panel should also think about possible effect modifiers. the effect differ in different relative effects differ in different subgroups. So in this case the panel and the systematic review team suggested that larger benefit in relative effect may happen in those who get the drug quickly less time from symptom onset. It may happen it may be more beneficial in those with negative corology or in unvaccinated people. So bottom line again, start with your PICO carefully. Consider your PICO, but when you're using core grade, also give some thought at that point to differences in baseline risk that may end up with different recommendations in a guideline or differences in relative effect and prespecify um the uh what those characteristics might be and the direction of the effect. Okay. Um that was the PICO and issues about the PICO including subgroups. Now we move to what is it in which we are rating our certainty which we call the target of the certainty rating. And what core grade suggests is you rate your certainty that the truth lies on one side of a threshold. The thresholds being no effect, minimally important difference, moderate effect and large effect. And that's illustrated on this slide. So to start with the thresholds, you see one threshold is the null effect. Moving to the left, a threshold for a small but important benefit, which we call the minimally important difference, a moderate effect threshold, and a large effect threshold. And you have the same thresholds on the harm side. And those thresholds then define ranges. If you're anywhere between the MID, minimally important difference for benefit, and the MID for harm, you will be in a range of little or no effect, which you might otherwise call an unimportant effect. If you are between the MID for benefit and the moderate effect threshold, you're in a range of small benefits. Between moderate and large, a range of moderate and large uh uh to the left of the of the large threshold, you're in a large benefit. core grade thinks this is a little more complicated than is necessary and there is actually very little to be gained by an explicit uh specification of moderate and large thresholds. So core grade uses only two thresholds the null effect and the minimally important difference. So as I move forward those are the two thresholds that we are going to be talking about. So, in a little while, we're going to have the first poll. So, pay close attention. We're going to want you to jump in and answer some questions. So, this uh slide depicts three thresholds. One threshold is no effect, relative risk of one risk difference of zero and then a minimally important difference. One minimally important difference and a second minimally important difference. The dot represents the point estimate and this immediately shows you that all you need to decide on the certainty the target of your certainty rating what it is in which you are rating your certainty is picking a threshold and looking at the point estimate. So let's decide it. Let's decide that if we were using a minimally important difference, it's MID1. And in what might we rate our certainty if that's our choice? Well, would it still be possible to rate your certainty in a nonzero effect? In this case, a benefit. Yes or no? First poll. Is it on in this instance to rate the certainty in no uh no difference between the two? Yes or no? I've got that poll launched now.
And Johanna's going to tell me I apparently am not going to see the results. So Johanna is going to tell me. So what have what what are we what are people coming up with? Okay. What? Yes is the most popular answer. 79% 82% yes and 15%. Okay. Very good. By far majority say yes. Okay. The overwhelming majority have got it right. Yes. Um you it is still a decision. You can decide you can say well um we're going to put aside the minimally important difference. There may be various reasons for doing that. one of which sometimes they're very difficult to uh to specify and your target audience may be primarily interested in the question of is there a nonzero effect so yes when you choose mid1 quite possible to rate your certainty in a no effect if you choose mid1 and have that point estimate yes or no can you rate will might you rate your certainty in an important act. Yes or no?
Wow, fast. Okay, so we've got 82% yeses and 17 18% nos. Okay, once again, the majority is correct. the point estimate is to the left the benefit side the left of mid1. So that means if the point estimate were the truth, we would have an important effect. And since we're starting with the possibility, perhaps the likelihood that the point estimate that the truth is at least near the point estimate. If that were the case, we would have an important effect and thus we should rate our certainty in an important effect. With the that point estimate at MID1, would it be appropriate to rate the certainty in an unimportant effect? Yes or no?
A few straddlers here, but most people a smaller majority saying no. 65% nos, 35% yeses. Ah, okay. Here's where here is where I get nervous. Um, because I wonder when it's that kind of split whether I've made things clear. And if at the end of the explanation I'm still not clear, you can put up a question and try to help me be clear because the answer here is no. Um the point estimate were it the truth? It's big a bigger effect than mid1. It's clearly an important effect. So we're going to want to be rating our certainty in an important effect. the uh that's that's what the evidence suggests. And you can't rate your certainty in both. You're either going to be rating your certainty. If you choose the MID as a threshold, you're going to be e rating either rating your certainty an important effect or an unimportant effect. And in this case with MID1 and the point estimate is in the range of an important effect, you're going to be rating your certainty in an important effect. But what if
um I may be in tr Oh, there we go. Okay, now it's changing. What if we choose MID2 because you know it's a decision. Uh it depends on patient values and preferences. So let's say we chose as our minimally important difference MID2. Same questions. Is it possible to still in this situation uh rate our certainty in a nonzero effect? And the answer is
ending. Okay, we've got an even I'll give it another second. We're exactly 50/50. Let's see if anything pulls ahead.
Okay. Okay. We're going to say 56% yeses and 4% nos. The majority has got it right. Um it's always possible if you think your audience is interested in whether there is a nonzero effect to rate your certainty in a nonzero effect. And where people might have got confused is we have specified an MID but we'll come to the situation subsequently where it is possible to rate your to make two different certainty of evidence ratings. your EV you may have you may a guideline panel or a systematic review group may say we think there are some people who are going to be interested in whether there's a nonzero effect and there may be some people who are interested in whether there is an important effect and so they may end up making both ratings and it's always possible to make your to choose the null and start with a certainty in a nonzero effect in this case it would be a certainty in a benefit. So always possible to do that with mid2. Does it make sense to rate your certainty in an important effect? Yes or no?
Okay, we've got 38% saying yes and 62% saying no. Okay, majority again, right? But I'm always nervous when a substantial proportion um do not get it right. Here the point estimate is to the right of MID2. In other words, less benefit than the MID. In other words, if that point estimate represented the truth, we would have an effect, but it would be an unimportant effect. It would be less than our minimally important difference. So we are not going to rate uh we are not going to be rating our certainty in an important effect because the point estimate if it were true represents an unimportant effect being to the right of our mid threshold. So that gives you a good clue about rating the certainty in an unimportant effect. Is that a good idea?
Okay, we've got 69% yeses and 31% nos. So, still a bit split there. I am still so I I am I feel a little bit of a failure at this point. um because uh I'm not getting it through and you know if in the questions either now or later you can help me to make it clear that point estimate if it were true it's to the right of the MID in other words it represents an effect less than the MIDI is the smallest important effect so if that point estimate is true that is an unimportant effect and If our best guess looking at the point estimate in relation to the mid is that if that point estimate were true the effect would be unimportant then we're going to rate our certainty in an unimportant effect. So bottom line which is bottom lines from this you can always rate your certainty in respect to the null and um uh when you choose the mid if the point estimate is less than the mid you're going to be rating your certainty in an unimportant effect and if the point estimate is greater than the mid you're going to be rating your certainty in an important effect. Okay, I'm starting to have problems with changing the slides. Yes, someone is glad that on their end it's coming up. They've got to answer all three questions at once and so they like some folks would have changed their answer after hearing you talk if that made sense. So, you're being told that you are being very clear. Um, they just had to write too soon. So, I'm gonna leave those if they're appearing at the same time, I'm gonna leave them open a little longer so people can change their answers if if Okay, Joanna, thank you for very much. That's that's very reassuring and thanks to thanks to the audience for uh the participants uh for clarifying that. I appreciate it. We do have one question about that. um maybe so um the question is if the point estimate were closer to the mid 2 threshold but still to the right could one consider the effect to be important since it is a continuum. Yes. Um that is an excellent question. So the um uh the the MIDS usually we or very often sometimes we have particularly with patient reported outcomes we have a pretty good idea with empirical evidence from uh seeing how patients respond about what the MID is. But a lot of time the mid is not so certain. And if that point estimate is very close to our mid then we're in a range of uncertainty. Is the effect important? Is it not important and you may well want to take that into account. As a matter of fact, we're just in the midst of writing a paper about what to do when the point estimate is uh near the mid. That's complicated and is not ever going to be part of core grade because the um the marginal gain of getting into that level of sophistication we don't think is worth it uh for most for most for for many great users. So this is a good example of uh what core grade focuses on. All you got to do is look at the point estimate in relation to your choice of the mid and proceed accordingly. However, if you want to move to an additional level of sophistication, you might say okay the point estimate is very close to that mid what are the implications of that and that is guidance. So grade will always provide guidance beyond core grade. What core grade says is you want to do the basics. You want to focus on what's essential. It will get you there. And we believe in making our choices of what's in core grade that if you just use the core, you will very seldom if ever get it seriously wrong. So all the extra stuff is nice methodologically sophisticated but the incremental benefit is not crucial. Core grade defines what is crucial and what is crucial in just this case is just look at your point estimate in relation to your mid and what might be more sophisticated is the sort of things that you could do the options that come up if your point estimate is very close to the mid. So great question. Can I launch a couple more at you before you move on? Absolutely. Thank you very much. It gets more interesting and hopefully educational when people ask their questions. So, thank you. Okay. So, first of two is when talking about the minimally important differences and rating certainty of evidence. The example uses a point estimate. My question here is what about the confidence intervals surrounding that point estimate? Would not the uncertainty surrounding the point estimate come into the decision? um it does not come into decision of the target of certainty rating but I love people's questions like this because on the next slide we're going to move to consideration of the confidence intervals around the point estimate and the implications where they come in which is whether to rate down for imprecision or not rate down for imprecision. So he's just ahead of the game here. Okay, perfect. So, we might move on to that in just a second, but we've got one more question, which is, should MIDS always be decided at the protocol stage or can these decisions be made at a later date? Um, ideally, they would be decided uh at the protocol stage. However, it may be take a situation you're in a systematic review team uh and you are working with a guideline and the people running the guidelines say get to work please. Um uh we're we're uh we're constructing our panel and we'd like you to get moving. So, you get moving, you choose your mids, and then the panel gets together and says, "Wait a minute. Um, the uh we would like to we we we think you got the mids long. Could you please redo your certainty of evidence rating with our mids?" So, that kind of situation may arise. Or, uh, we've had this um, we don't know yet what the panel is going to choose for their mids. So we do our first certainty of rating with respect to the null and then when the panel tells us what the mids are, we then redo our certainty of rating with respect to the mids. So ideally it's in the protocol, but there may be circumstances when you're going to be open to uh either either leaving it out and then adding it later or modifying it later. Good. Thank you. Okay. All right. I'm going to let you go. All right. Okay. More um in this uh eight eight yes or no answers. Okay. We have four points say this comes out of a systematic review and meta analysis. Um you have four point estimates and four confidence intervals. So in the so with respect to uh the null in a what do you think with respect to the null with that point estimate and confidence interval do you are you going to rate down for imprecision when the target of your certainty rating is you see your point estimate is on the benefit side. So we're now rating our certainty in a benefit, not in an important benefit. We're just rating our certainty in a benefit. So we're just reading impre do we write down for imprecision? That's the question. Thank you. Threshold is the mid. So we're thinking about imprecision here for a well we're start we're but we're starting with our target of the certainty. The first one is I hope is target of the certainty rating relative to we're rating our certainty relative to the null. Okay. In other words, we're rating our certainty in any effect, a nonzero effect. Is that what the poll says or not? I've got do we rate down for imprecision if threshold is the mid here? Am I in the wrong place? Um, I was hoping for each one to do the null first and then the mid. Um, so what do you think we should do? Let me think about that for just a second. So let's
Oh, I think I can just edit that here now. So I'm going to end that poll. So we're thinking about rating down imprecision if threshold is the null. Is that right? And that's for A. So what I was hoping to do and maybe the polling technology does not accommodate well. What I was hoping to do for each of A, B, C, and D is first ask do you rate down with respect to the null and then do you rate down for with respect to when you've chosen the threshold of the mid. So the uh uh so what I would hope to do is a are you going to rate down precision with respect to the null then with respect to a what about if you if your threshold is the MI? It's a little funky with the presentation of the questions but I think we can do it. So, what I'm going to do is launch and just ask people to to rate answer whether they would rate down in precision if threshold is the null for A. Then I'll flip over to if threshold is the MID and then I'll like I'll toggle back and forth between them. If that makes sense. Should we give it a try? It makes total sense. And Joanna, thank you for your marvelous adapt adaptility. You you you you didn't have a nervous breakdown and say, "Oh, not a single nervous breakdown." You you you have come up with a quick solution. So that's great. Okay, let's try it. Okay. So let's talk about a you see the point estimate of the confidence interval. You're rating your certainty with respect. You set your threshold of the null. So you're rating your certainty in any benefit in a nonzero benefit with that point estimate and confidence interval. Should we rate down for imprecision? Yes or no? And we're just going to consider A here. See we're just considering A with and with a target of the certainty rating in a nonzero effect, a nonzero benefit in this case.
Sorry folks, bear with me for just a second. Doesn't want Oh, it is. Well, the technology may foil you despite your best intentions here. No, I'm determined. Let's see. Hang tight.
Oh, I see what the problem is.
So, while Johanna's fixing this, I was delighted that um I was given an hour and a half for this because um doing all these polls, which I think enhances the fun and the engagement and the learning, it takes time. So, if I'd had an hour, no way. But with an hour and a half, I think we're going to manage it. All right, here we go. I'm hoping that's loading now. So, we're just considering writing down imprecision if threshold is the null for A. Just ignore the rest of those questions there and just focus on one at a time. Okay. A threshold we've picked as the null target of certainty rating is a nonzero benefit. Do we rate down for imprecision with that point estimate and confidence interval? Yes or no? Okay, we've got the vast majority saying no. 86% say no. All right. And how did we make that decision? You make that decision by whether the confidence interval crosses your threshold. And you see in this case the confidence interval is nowhere near the threshold. The entire confidence interval is well to the right left sorry of our threshold of the null. So we're not going to rate down. Now let's switch to the mid which is the uh broken line. So we're going to be rating our certainty in an important effect. Why are we rating our certainty in an important effect? Because the point estimate is to the left of our mid point estimate represents a bigger effect than a minimally important difference. Thus an important effect. So now if we're rating our certainty relative to the mid, are we going to rate down for imprecision? Yes or no? And we're just thinking about A here. That's right. We're just thinking about A. One at a time.
Okay. Very very vast majority say no. 91%. Okay. I am encouraged. the entire confidence interval is to the left of the threshold and as a result uh we have excluded at least as far as precision is concerned unimportant differences we're sure it's important at least with respect to precision and so we're not going to rate down for imprecision let's move to B with respect to the null as the threshold are we going to rate down for imprecision Yeah.
So, we're just thinking about B here. Just thinking about B and just thinking about the threshold of the null.
Okay, just thinking about the threshold of the null. We've got 91 saying no, do not. And you're right again. Why is that? because the threshold the confidence interval is all on the left side of the threshold of the null. It doesn't overlap our chosen threshold and thus we do not rate down. What if our chosen threshold is not the null but is the mid again as in a our point estimate is to the left of our mid. It's an effect bigger than the mid. So we're going to be rating our certainty in an important benefit. Do we rate down for imprecision?
So just thinking about the mid for B there we have 95 94% saying yes. Okay. Excellent. Now the confidence interval crosses the mid. it crosses our threshold and as soon as it crosses our threshold we are rating down. So that is the principle the we pick a threshold if our confidence interval is all on one side of the threshold we don't write down if our confidence interval crosses the threshold we do write down okay C let's say we said our threshold is the null um and where the point estimate is we're going to be rating our certainty in harm this time because the point estimate is on the right side of the null which is the harm side. So in C with with respect to the null are we going to rate down for imprecision
90% yes and that's right because that confidence interval crosses our threshold of the null. But if we're rating our certainty with respect to the MID and the um uh if we are rating our certainty in the mid, we are going to be rating our certainty in an unimportant effect. We we've decided we're just interested in the MID of benefit there. Um, you'll see later on we could also be considering MID for harm, but we're just considering our MID of benefit. The point estimate is to the right. So, we're rating our certainty if there's any effect at all in it being unimportant. Are we going to rate down for imprecision? So, just thinking about C here, we have 82% saying no, 81%. Okay, not quite the same overwhelming, but pretty good. Um, no we're not going to rate down the entire confidence interval is to the right of our mid threshold. That means with respect to precision, we have ruled out an important benefit. Right? The entire the range of plausible truth is all less than our MID point estimates actually in the harm side. But the point here with respect to the MID, the entire confidence interval is to the right of our threshold. It is not crossing and since it is not crossing we are confident at least with respect to precision that the effect is less than our mid and we will not rate down. Okay move to D. Threshold is the null. Do we rate down? Okay, here we are for D.
96% saying yes. Right. And 96% are right and I'm pleased the uh the confidence interval crosses our threshold and so we're going to rate down. What about the mid? The point estimate suggests an important benefit. The point estimate is to the left of the mid and so we're going to be rating our certainty in an important effect. Are we going to rate down for imprecision?
Thinking just about D here. And we've got 94% saying, well, let me phrase it here. 93% saying yes. Yes. And it's should hopefully getting relatively simple. The confidence interval does not cross our threshold. We don't rate them. The confidence interval crosses the threshold. We do. And here indeed the confidence interval crosses the threshold. Our point estimate suggests an important benefit but we are with respect to that confidence interval we are not at all sure. And so because of the cross and the substantial cross in this case we're going to be rating down for imprecision. Okay. Um we will continue with the theme of imprecision and we are going to now point out that one may be choosing different targets of certainty and as I said earlier it's possible to actually if you think your audience will be well informed to present them with certainty using two targets such as what's our certainty if we choose the null as our threshold What's our certainty if we choose the MID as a threshold? So here in A you have a point estimate and confidence interval. And in each case I'm going to ask you would it be reasonable to rate one certainty with respect to a particular threshold and thus a target. So you will remember now this time we have our mid of benefit on the left and our mid for harm on the right. And if the truth is between those two MIDs, we would have little or no effect. In other words, we don't have a we have an unimportant effect either with respect to an important benefit or an important harm. So with that point estimate, um it are you going to be um are is it u is it appropriate to rate your certainty in little or no effect?
Well, sorry I got that wrong. Apologies. Apologies. um it is appropriate to write down our certainty in a little or no effect because the point estimate is in the range of little or no effect. The question is are we going to rate down for imprecision if we rate our certainty in little or no effect.
And again, we're just going to focus the presentation of the questions is a little strange here, but we're just going to think here about we're thinking only of a and the question is, is it appropriate to rate? Well, it is appropriate to rate your certainty and little and no effect. Do we rate down for imprecision? So, you're answering that question too there. Do we rate down for imprecision if there's certainty and little or no effect? Have I got that right? If our target of our certainty rating is little or no effect, will you rate down for imprecision?
And that should be coming up there now.
So if you just answer that that first question there where it says write down for imprecision considering certainty and little or no effect, we'll go from there.
Okay. So, we have 95% saying yes. Okay. Excellent. Um the confidence interval it crosses one of our three
harm and as a result we are not so confident there's a little or no effect. There may be important harm and tell you what I'm going to do with the e even with giving me an hour and a half. We're using up our time and this is getting challenging with the um uh with the polling. So, I'm going to go through these and just talk about them. Okay. So, what about certainty in no important benefit? We're saying the truth is no important benefit. Well, the point estimate suggests no important benefit. point estimate is in fact on the harm side and important benefit is represented by the mid to the left of zero and the confidence interval does not cross that threshold. So with respect to our precision we are confident that there's not an important effect. The biggest possible effect is still less than the mid. So we're not going to rate down for imprecision. What about certainty and no important harm? Well, no important harm mid the confidence interval crosses and as a result we're going to rate down for imprecision. What about the same questions with respect to B? Well, here's what B looks like. Certainty in little or no effect. We're going to rate down for imprecision because if the left boundary of the confidence interval is true, there is an important effect and although the point estimate suggests that there are no effect, important effect may still be true. We're going to rate down for imprecision certainty in no important benefit. Oh, we're not certain there's no important benefit. If the left boundary of the confidence interval is true, then we would have important benefit. It crosses our threshold and we're going to rate down certainty and no important harm. Well, now we're focusing on the other end of the confidence interval by harm. And look, the confidence interval does not cross our threshold of important harm. Uh we have excluded at least with respect to imprecision important harm. So you can see number of things illustrated here. Bottom line is still the same. Pick your threshold or in this case thresholds of minimally important benefit and minimally important harm. See if you cross the what of your your relevant threshold. If you cross, you rate down. If you don't cross, you don't. Okay, that is now hopefully you are well acquainted with how to choose the target of your certainty rating. Focusing on one of two choices, the null or the mid is the threshold and then a nonzero effect with the null, an important or unimportant difference with the mid and then you just check whether you're crossing one of your thresholds. All right, so great. Unfortunately there is a uh one caveat which is we think important enough to be included in the core and that is that is in core grade that is small trials with large effects. We have found that early in the evidence we have a posity of data but the posity of data suggests a large treatment effect. that tends not to be replicable. When more data accumulates, there isn't a large treatment effect. Maybe there's isn't going to be any treatment effect at all. So, we need to be skeptical. It's a red flag. Systematic review or guideline team, you see a small effect, you s you see a large effect with a small sample sizes, then you say, No, you have to be nervous here. So the grade faced the question, how do you decide what what what uh decision? How do you make your decision whether it this is this small effect? Sorry, the small sample size is enough of a problem. Well, we've come up with optimal information size. The number of patients you would have in a conventional sample size calculation. you specify your control group risk, your alpha, your beta and your delta. And if the optimal information size is not met, in other words, if you were doing a conventional sample size calculation and the sample size comes to more than the number of patients in the studies in all the studies putting together, this is a systematic review. you're going to say, well, it may meet our criteria for not crossing the threshold, but we're still going to rate down for imprecision. Let me give you an example. This is floricquin prophylaxis in patients with chemotherapy related neutropenia, infection related mortality. And it turns out you have a number of trials and the point estimate suggests a benefit. It suggests a big 62% relative risk reduction in mortality in infection related mortality with uh the fuoroquinol alone. Uh we don't usually very seldom do we see effects that big. So now we're on the now now we would ask the question using our usual threshold approach of the MID are we going to are we do is it going to uh are we going to conclude we don't rate down for imprecision and it turns out that probably is what we should do because the lower bound of that confidence interval presented here in relative effects what's important to patients it's absolute effect so we need to change it to an absolute effect that's an absolute effect of 2.1% reduction in mortality. Clearly to take fluorocron for a week or two um the uh and it reduces your mortality by 2% no question we're going to take the floricquin. So this clearly represents an important effect. It would not cross our threshold. The our threshold would be whether it's 1% or half a percent. Those are the sort of thresholds that people have come up with in mortality and guidelines. But it's clearly less. We don't even have to specify a specific threshold. We know that 2.1% represents an important effect and we using our usual criteria of the confidence interval crossing the threshold we would not rate down. However, the total sample size was a,02 and if we did our optimal information size, we would require 6,000 patients. Clearly, this is an example of a big treatment effect that is implausible with relatively small numbers of events um and doesn't meet our optimal information size. So even though in this instance it meets our usual criteria of not crossing our threshold, we're going to rate down for imprecision in any case. So what are our bottom lines about uh target of certainty rating and uh imprecision? We need first to decide on the target of our certainty rating. We need to choose a threshold and in the core grade it's just one of two. the null or the mid and then we look at the upper boundary and lower boundaries of the confidence interval. Relatively simple. If they cross the threshold, you rate down. If they don't cross the threshold, you don't. With this little uh reservation, which is if it's a large effect with few patients, you will think about your optimal information size. And if it's not met, you're going to rate down for imprecision. Can I jump in with a question that's been asked, please? So, um, we've got, is the optimal information size only considered, and you've sort of answered this, but I think there's a clarification request in here. When the events estimate indicates a large effect, i.e. not when there is a small effect, and if so, why so? So, I suppose why are we only considering if the effect is large? Okay. Um, if there is a small effect and there's not many patients, it's going to cross your threshold. Small effect, a small effect with few patients. If you if whether your threshold is the null or the MID, it's certain to cross. So, you don't have to worry about it. the only time. So our our usual approach of looking at the ends of the confidence intervals are going to work just fine with a small effect where our usual approach does not work so well is only with a large effect because a large effect you can get what seems like a relatively narrow confidence interval but it isn't. it it uh uh it looks okay but it isn't because it tends to be nonreplicable. So small uh small effect if you have if you if if indeed you don't cross if with a small effect if you indeed don't cross a threshold it's because you had a decent sample size. Um so we only have the problem uh with a large effect with a small effect. Our usual approach of crossing our threshold approach works just fine. Got it. Thank you. Uh thanks for the question. Excellent question. Okay. So we have finished with choosing our target of certainty rating and looking at precision. We're now going to look at um risk of bias. And I see even with my hour and a half, I'm using up my time. So I'm going to move a little quickly through this. Uh be nice to have a few minutes for final questions at the end. So randomized control trials, what are our key risk of bias criteria? Concealment, blinding, loss to followup. I've said Cochran risk of bias 2 is too complicated. Earlier this year in the BMJ we published robust RCT which is consistent with the principles we believe of core grade of being uh methodologically sophisticated while still optimal simplicity and you can see they are to the traditional going back to RO1 the criteria that you have uh there are six of them rand random sequence generation, allocation, concealment, blinding of participants, blinding of health care providers, blinding of outcomes assessors and not too many people lost the followup. Um, and a innovation in uh core grade or it is for core grade 2, but in particular here for uh robust RCT uh is that there's two steps. First you say what happened and then you judge the risk of bias. So what happened? So let me give you an example where they may be different. Let's say you do not blind the outcome assessors but your outcome is mortality. Um the uh uh in that case even though it's unblinded since it's pretty difficult to make a mistake whether somebody's dead or not. um uh they failed the criteria of protecting against risk of bias but it doesn't matter it doesn't introduce risk of bias. So we ask our reviewers um to make those two decisions and that can be we think helpful to the team and the audience. We came up with another set of criteria that could introduce bias but me has one of three problems. Number one the data is not ava often not available. Secondly, it happens very infrequently. Or thirdly, it's too it's very challenging for our reviewers. And so we've said you might want to think about it. It's up to the systematic review team to say in our particular systematic review, do we want to consider one of these optional items? So that is robust RCT. What about cohort studies? Don't use Robin's eye. too complicated for core grade. Um Ottawa Newcastle has been around for years. It has limitations. We've our clarity team at McMaster has come up with a modification which you can find on our website. And um one difference is that Ottawa Newcastle has an item that's clearly we think applicability and we're going to restrict to items that are in fact risk of bias. And what you see here is this uh are the items. I won't go through them now for the sake of time, but you can find them in the uh clarity modification of Ottawa Newcastle. So uh rating uh overall across trials and I have some nice polls here, but with the time I'm going to pass on the polling and just take you through the issues. So most high risk of bias, you're going to rate down. Most low risk of bias, you're not going to rate down. What about whether it's 50/50? Think of three studies with a 100 patients each have low risk of bias. Three studies with a 100 patients each have high risk of bias. Do you rate down for risk of bias? Yes or no? I was going to poll you, so think about it if we won't do the poll, but think about it for a second. Three studies low risk of bias. Three studies high risk of bias. Same number of patients. Do you rate down for risk of bias? Well, the next question I was going to ask you was when a study is unconcealed, are you sure the results are biased? The answer is no. Maybe it was unconcealed, but it probably wasn't bad enough to introduce serious bias. What about blinding? It's unblinded. I've just given you an example with all cores of mortality outcome assessors aren't blinded but it's not a problem. So do when there's no when blinding isn't there are we sure that it's going to introduce bias? No. That's why we call it risk of bias. We don't call it bias. We call it risk of bias because we're actually never sure when a criterion is not met that it has actually biased the results. So as a result what are the implications in the situation? And I said where half the studies are low risk of bias, half the studies are high risk of bias. What if they have different results? Then why why cause problems with your high risk of bias studies which just make your results which make your inferences less secure? Get rid of the high risk of bias. Just use the low risk of bias. What if the results are similar? In that case you can infer that if there really was risk of bias in the high risk of bias studies they would have given different results. So in this case we can infer that the risk of bias did not actually bias the results. We can use all the studies and not rate down for risk of bias. Gordon, do you mind just flipping your slides? I think like maybe um minimizing and maximizing them again because they seem to have frozen. Uh oh. Okay. So, it might be good to just do like a g I've gone off presentation mode. Um, so I'm going to go back maybe also stop sharing and restart sharing. Oh, stop sharing and start sharing again. Okay, I'm happy to do that. Um, I have now stopped sharing. Um, and I am now going to start sharing again. Thank you for that technical suggestion. Okay, now it goes. Okay. So I think and I'm back. Okay. Are we moving? All right. Yes, you're moving now. Okay. Okay. Final point. Core grade has an innovation which we think you will like and that is uh we have a lot of the an algorithm uh or flowchart approach. So this is one for risk of bias. Um is evidence dominated by the high risk of bias studies? Yes. you're usually going to uh rate down. This also gives the situation where for instance um you're worried that unblinding is going to overestimate treatment effects but there's no treatment effect. Well, even if it's unblinded, that's not a problem. So, but usually if there studies are dominated by high risk of bias, you rate that. They're not dominated. Um if they're dominated by the low risk of bias, no problem. If it's a close call, then you're going to use what I just went through there. If the results differ in high and low risk, you just use the low risk. If they're no different, you make the inference that in this instance, the risk of bias didn't create bias, you can use all the studies and not rate down for risk of bias. In conclusion, grade has been a great advance in systematic review and clinical practice guideline, but it's become too complicated and difficult to navigate. Core Grade provides a solution, a one-stop shopping. As I say, you just go to those seven articles earlier on this year in the BMJ and you have all you need to make your grade certainty of evidence and moving from evidence to recommendations for um uh paired comparisons of an intervention and control. So, um I have used up almost all my time, but seven minutes left. though for any questions about anything that we have been through I would be happy to address now did a great job breezing through those last bits Jordan and getting us out we've got a few questions I might ask I don't know that we'll get to all of them but I might do a couple of the more general questions and then a couple of the more detailed methods if that's okay so we get a bit of a spread um so we've got a question here about um comparisons between chord rate and fold rate have you compared whether there are any differences in the grade certainty of evidence rating using poor grade compared to parentheses full grade across a range of systematic reviews and if the ratings are the same then does this suggest that the additional complexity of grade has little advantage um the answer is we have not done it formally but when we developed core grade that's exactly what we were thinking do the does the fancy stuff um and there's one fancy stuff that came with a very good question. What if your point estimate is near the threshold? What do you do then? Well, you can go and say okay uh you can rate your certainty in whether the truth is near the threshold. You can switch your target of certainty rating to that for instance. There are other solutions as well. Whole bunch of them. Um, but we don't think that any of them will end up making a difference in your final certainty of evidence ratings or or uh direction or strength of recommendations. And that was our test that we had in our heads. No, we haven't gone and tested it. Um, and maybe sometime we will, but we uh uh uh we we chose core grade believing that we were choosing criteria that if you did the fancy stuff, it would not make important differences in certainty rating or strength of recommendations. And yes, we believe it's okay that the incremental value it's fun to do the fancy stuff, but it probably doesn't make an important difference. I kind of have a question on that. Maybe that just have you noticed um like has there been what has it been like explaining the differences between core grade and full grade that much? I haven't had to explain them. Okay. And I should make another point. We've been using core grade for years. Okay. That is that is actually that is worth mentioning. We have been using I do we have people may be familiar with BMJ rapid recommendations. They're core grade. Um I've done a lot of work with WH and COVID and subsequently we use we you with our guideline panels we want to keep things as as rigorous but as simple as possible. We've been using core grade for years. That's Yep. And somebody said there would be an interesting swar in there comparing core grade and grade and systematic reviews which I think is true. Yes. Yes. Maybe those of you interested in doing research can do it. See what happens. We've got a question here. Would you recommend using grade pro for using Torrade? And if using Torra, would you suggest citing Torra alongside grade? So I suppose those are sort of general methods questions there. Okay. The the the um uh Okay. So number one um uh total bias uh big. So first of all when I do mine I don't use any of the software. I'm a software I'm a I'm a software controversial skeptic. Okay. So I don't use it but I am very associate I'm strongly associated I'm on the board of the making uh of magic which is making grade the irresistible choice which has alternative software to grade pro which we call the magic app. So with total bias I say magic app is actually better than grade pro uh particularly for making guidelines and um uh so if you want to use so software I will buy I will biasedly say magic app rather than grade and maybe we could link to that alongside the recording of the webinar too as a resource that'd be good that would be uh as as a board member of uh the magic evidence ecosystem. I would love it. Okay. Um, we've got a couple more technical questions here. The first is, what is the best approach to defining the MID for various adverse events of an intervention? Um, it's very challenging. The the best approach would be look at studies of values and preferences for those outcomes. Unfortunately, you usually find a posity. You may find nothing. And so you have may have patients on the panel that help you. You may have clinician experts on the panel that can help you. But inevitably there's certainty. So a lot of times for patient for patient reported outcome measures uh there's a lot of good mids. As soon as you get out of that such as specific adverse effects, you have very little data and so sadly it's a guess. Okay. Thank you. Um, I might take it one or two more here and then we'll wrap up because I want I'm conscious of time and I want to get you out of here on time, Jordan. Um, and we've also got another session. So, what we might do is save some of these questions. Yeah, you can save if you if you go over your questions and you talk to some people in your audience. Anyway, we could start start the next session with F with questions from part one. That might be the way to go. Okay. So, um I'm just going to pull a couple of these that I think might be very widely applicable. So, someone's asked, I think you mentioned removing studies that were rated high risk of bias if the results were different. I think that's what you said. Sorry if I misheard. That is exactly what I said. Removing them entirely or removing them for the sensitivity analysis. Uh removing them entirely. Why would you want to here? If you focus on the low risk of bias studies, you got higher certainty evidence with low risk. Why would you throw in things that diminish your certainty and uh uh and are liable to bias the results? No, you get rid of them. You have one analysis. If there are differences between high and low risk, it tells you that risk of bias actually influence things. So why why throw in the high risk of bias? Clear. Okay. Thank you. And then maybe the last one we'll take today is do I do the robust RCT on the core study parenthesis primary report only or also every post hawk analysis including secondary reports. How do I handle different blinding procedures for different outcomes of the same study? Oh my goodness. Um that question is so sophisticated. I'm not sure I understand it. So maybe for the next time um whoever did it can send me an email. My email is very simple guy gyt my last name atmcmaster.ca and that online too. So and um the um I take quest I am open to any questions about core grade from anybody. Okay. And I'm I'm saving them as frequently asked questions about core grade. Anybody in this audience, you have a question about core grade, I'm happy to answer it personally. Send it to me on my email address. Thank you very much. And we have you again for another session. So we might then take some of these questions at the beginning of that or or or people can send them to me on my email and I will answer them before the before the next session. Okay, perfect. Thank you, Jordan. so so much for being here. Um, I have a couple just little housekeeping bits to to run through before we go. Um, and yeah, you go ahead and go if you need to go and I'll just throw out a thanks for the great participation in the polls and the great questions. It's made Thanks very much, Jordan. It'll be good to see you again soon. Okay, bye. And then, um, just to answer that last question that I've got here about the slides, um, yes, we will link the slides and the recording on our website after the session. So, you can find those by going to www.evsynthesisland.ie
um and clicking on the past trainings tab. Um so, we'll make sure that you those get into your hands as well. Um okay, just a last couple of reminders now that Jordan has gone. So, first I've dropped a feedback form into the chat and we'll send that along by email as well. Um please do have a look at this and fill it out if you can. would be really helpful um both in terms of planning future sessions in general and also in terms of planning the next part two of this series. Um secondly, speaking of part two of this series, we'll be back on the 22nd of January at 2:00 p.m. Irish time for part two. And on that day, we'll deal with Torra's approach to inconsistency, indirectness, as well as moving from evidence to recommendations. So, if you'd like to join that session, be sure to sign up by following that second link that I've just dropped into the chat. Um, you can also sign up for any of our trainings, including that one, and find recordings of past sessions, including from this session, by going to our website at www.evansynthesis.ie.
And if you want to keep track of what's coming up, be sure to also follow us on Twitter and on LinkedIn. Um, okay. That's all I've got for today and I hope to see many of you back here on the 22nd of January for part two of this series. Thank you again for all of your questions and for your engagement in this. I really appreciate it. Bye.
Recording.